- Hello.
You're all here to learn
about quantum computing,
but before we can dive into that topic
we have to start with
some preliminary subjects,
for example, linear algebra
for quantum computing.
Now, don't panic.
We're not gonna require you
to do mathematical proofs
and we're not going to give you homework.
The goal is to give you
just enough linear algebra
so that later when we're applying this
in quantum physics and quantum computing,
you can follow along.
So let's jump right in.
We'll start with some
basics of linear algebra,
what it is, what it was developed for,
and how we're going to
use it in this course.
The first thing about linear algebra
is it was actually developed,
as the name suggests,
to solve systems of linear equations,
but people discovered
there were other things
you could do with it.
In fact, what we're
going to be doing with it
really has nothing to do with solving
linear sets of equations.
What we're going to do is basically
represent things as a matrix.
It's basically a set of elements
organized into rows and columns.
And we can treat these matrices
like numbers, like operators,
all sorts of things we can do with them
that you're going to see
throughout this course.
Now, there are some
special types of matrices
you should be familiar with.
There's the column matrix
and the row matrix.
Those are fairly self-explanatory.
A square matrix, the same
number of rows and columns.
Two matrices are considered equal
only if they have the same
number of rows and columns
and the same elements in
those rows and columns.
A zero matrix may seem trivial,
but it is used occasionally.
It basically is a matrix
that contains all zeros.
Now there's some basic operations.
Some of these are easy,
for example addition and subtraction.
You do it just the way you did
addition and subtraction
back in elementary school.
You simply add or subtract
each of the elements.
So you start with the top left
element in the first matrix
and add or subtract it
to the top left element in the second.
And you continue through them all,
as you can see on the screen.
Multiplying gets a little bit different.
We're going to first
multiply the first element,
first top left-hand corner
of each of the matrices.
Then we're going to get the
second element in the first row
of the first matrix and multiply it
times the second element
in the first column
of the second matrix.
We're going to continue this process.
We'll take the first element
in the first row of the first matrix
and then multiply it
times the first element
in the second column of the second matrix.
Then we're going to
take the second element
in the first row of the first matrix
and multiply it times the second element
in the second column of the second matrix.
Now rather than try to
memorize all this stuff,
if you think about it for a moment
and you'll reflect on
what we see on the screen,
what you're actually doing
is multiplying the rows
in the first column by the
columns in the second matrix.
So rows in the first matrix times
columns in the second matrix
is how we go about multiplying
one matrix time another.
Think that through for just a moment.
We're trying to treat each of
these matrices as a number,
but it's a compound number,
it has several elements.
So to multiply it we need to make sure
we've appropriately multiplied
all the various elements together,
and the method you see on
the screen is how we do that.
Now, if two matrices are of the same size,
they can be added together by
simply adding each element.
We talked briefly about
that on the last screen,
and you're seeing an
example here on this screen.
Throughout this, you're
going to see examples
that are both generic, like the first one,
and then a concrete example
where we put actual numbers in there.
That allows you to work it out on your own
and see if you came up
with the same number,
and thus ensure that you've
mastered that technique.
Multiplication.
Well, first you can multiply
by what we call a scalar.
Now let's pause for a moment
and give you a little extra
on why we use the word scalar.
Mathematics can be represented
in many different ways.
We're looking at a matrix
representation right now.
Matrices can be graphed out
in a Cartesian coordinate system,
an X and Y axes with specific points
in the Cartesian coordinate system.
Well, if you were to represent
any matrix in that manner
and multiply at times some constant,
some whole number or even a
real number for that matter,
but a single number,
all you would've done is change the scale
of the graph on the matrix.
Put another way, let's
say we graph this out
and it turns into an arrow
going a certain direction
off the Cartesian coordinate system.
If we multiply it by any real number,
let's just pick a number, 7.2.
The only thing we will
have changed on that arrow
is its scale, how far it goes.
That's why we call multiplying
by a single number a scalar.
Now, here's a concrete
example at the bottom
where we multiply a
particular matrix times two.
And all we've done is change
the scale of the matrix.
Now, multiplying two matrices
gets more complicated.
First of all, the number of
columns in the first matrix
has to be the same as the number of rows
in the second matrix.
Now this is because, as I
was explaining a bit earlier,
what we're really doing is
multiplying columns in one
times rows in the other.
That's why the columns in
one have to be the same
as the number of rows in the other.
Now here we see a very generic example
where we take the elements
of the first matrix,
A, B, C, and D,
and the elements of the
second matrix, E, G, F and H,
only instead of adding them,
we're gonna multiply them.
So what happens is you see this
rather convoluted
multiplication at the beginning,
but it's precise what we said before,
and I will say it again.
We take A, which is the first element
in the first row of the first matrix.
And we multiply it times E.
Now, you can look at E a
couple of different ways.
You could say E is also the first element
in the first row of the second matrix,
or you could say it's the first element
in the first column of the second matrix.
We'll look at it that way.
Then the next thing we do is we take B,
which is the second element
in the first row of the first matrix.
Now multiply it times G,
which is the second element
in the second column
of the second matrix.
Then we add those two values together.
And you continue throughout that
getting all four combinations
of rows and columns.
What you'll end up with is a new matrix.
You will have computed new values for it.
Algebra's an interesting topic.
Many of us take algebra
in part of high school
or secondary school,
and it doesn't seem that
exciting at that point.
But in reality, algebra
is much broader than that.
In fact, there are graduate
mathematics courses
studying various specific
types of algebra.
Well, there's an algebra of matrices
and there are some specific rules.
You may have had some of
these rules presented to you
in high school or maybe
even primary school.
Associativity of addition.
It doesn't matter how I group the numbers,
the addition comes out the same.
Commutativity of addition.
It doesn't matter if I reverse the order,
addition is still the same.
The same holds true with associativity
and commutativity of multiplication.
Then the distributivity
of scalar multiplication,
in other words a scalar, a single number,
times some element, and
here we have U plus V.
I can distribute that to make
it A times U plus A times V.
A similar thing happens
with the distributivity
of scalar multiplication.
Now again, our goal
here is just to make you
familiar with these things.
When we use them later on,
I will make comments
to refresh your memory
of what we had done.
So don't feel like you
have to pause the course
and memorize all these.
And for some of you I'm quite certain,
some of this at least
is a bit of a review.
Now remember, matrix
multiplication is not commutative.
Now, that's something I
do want you to remember.
When we get to talking about
the physics of quantum
behavior, quantum physics,
this non-commutativity was an element
of a major breakthrough
that led to quantum physics
and then to quantum computing.
So, put another way, with
traditional real numbers
you and I are accustomed
to, 7.4 times 3.6,
I reverse that, I get the the same answer.
But with matrices, if I reverse the order,
I may or may not get the same answer.
If I do, it's just
incidental, it's not built in.
So we do not have commutativity
when multiplying matrices,
the order matters.
Now, the transposition
operation is much easier.
I literally transpose the
order of the rows and columns,
as you can see here on the screen.
I take the first row and I
turn it into the first column.
This is a terribly easy process to do,
and you'll see us do it a
little later in this course.
A submatrix.
This is one of the simplest
concepts we'll cover.
It's any portion of a matrix that remains
after we've deleted any
number of rows or columns.
Now, at this point with both submatrix
and the previous topic,
you're probably understanding it,
but you're wondering, "Why?"
Well, at this point, let's
set the why to one side.
What we're doing now is
just getting the skills,
and later when we use them
the why will become clear.
The identity matrix.
Now, let's pause and take a step back.
In addition you have an identity element.
Any number plus zero equals itself.
In multiplication, you
have an identity element.
Any number times one equals itself.
Well, we have the same
thing in matrix algebra.
If we take a matrix that's all zeros
except for the main diagonal.
That's the one that comes from upper left
down to lower right, that is all ones.
Then what you have is an identity matrix.
Any matrix times its identity
matrix equals itself.
It just accomplishes the same thing
that zero does with real number addition
and one does with real
number multiplication.
Now, this is going to be a
really important topic later,
so please pay close attention.
The length of a vector.
Now remember, we're looking at these
just as numbers on a
screen or in a matrix,
or in this case as a row vector,
but they could be put on a graph.
And if you thought about them that way,
it kind of makes sense to
use the Pythagorean theorem.
Remember that from long, long ago
in you're early days of schooling?
A squared plus B squared equal C squared,
it's basically how you compute
one side of a right triangle
when you don't know that side,
but you do know the other two.
The hypotonus is equal to
the other two sides squared.
Well, the same thing works here.
If I take a matrix, a column
or row matrix, a vector,
and I take each element and I square them,
add them together and
take the square root,
that is called the length of the vector.
Now, any non-negative link is
called the norm of the vector.
If that norm happens to be one,
then it's called a unit vector.
Again, these are going to
be important topics later,
both in quantum physics,
quantum computing,
and also in quantum algorithms.
Now, this is simply a summary
of some of the things we've talked about
in regards to transpositions.
And some of them should
be intuitively obvious.
If I take A and I make
a transposition of it,
and then I do a transposition
of that transposition,
I get back to A.
If I take a constant times A
and give that transposition,
it would be the same thing
as if I did the constant
times the transposition of A.
A times B transposed is the same thing
as B transposed times A transposed.
Now, pause right there.
Remember, that matrix
multiplication is not commutative.
So that order, B transposed
times A transposed,
is important.
If you flip it around, you
won't get the same answer.
A plus B transposed
is the same as A transposed
plus B transposed.
And of course there are
cases where a square matrix
may be actually equal to its transpose.
You transpose it and
you get the same thing.
If that happens, we call
that a symmetric matrix.